New short tech note: Git tricks (#810)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2024-08-20-git-tricks/index.md

---
slug: git-tricks

> title: Git Tricks to Work with Large Repos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Git Tricks for Working with Large Repositories
```

author:
  - Mauro Lepore

> date: "2024-08-20"

Reviewer: Update the date here *and* in the folder name.

tags:
  - tech-notes
  - git

>   - github

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - github
  - how-to
```

description: "`git clone` isn't always the right tool."
---

Recently [Yanina Bellini Saibene](/author/yanina-bellini-saibene/) reminded us
to update our Slack profile:

> Friendly reminder: Let's increase the value of our rOpenSci Slack community.
Please add details to your profile, e.g., your photo, your favorite social media
handle, what you do, your pronouns, and how to pronounce your name.

After doing that I went on to updating my profile photos on the rOpenSci
website, which ended up teaching me a few git tricks I would like to share here.
Thanks [Maëlle Salmon](/author/ma%C3%ABlle-salmon/) for the encouragement.

## Cloning as usual

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ropensci/roweb3.git
```

When I tried to clone the source code of rOpenSci's website I realized the repo
was large and it would take me several minutes, so I stopped the process and
researched how to just pull the latest version of the specific files I needed.

## Pulling the latest version of specific files

> 

Reviewer: I think it might help to walk people through the script in a bit more detail. What do you think of these suggestions?
```suggestion
First I used the terminal to fork the rOpenSci website repository (`roweb3`) using [gh](https://cli.github.com/). Then I created a local empty `roweb3` directory and linked it to the fork.
```

```bash
# if not using `gh` (https://cli.github.com/), fork ropensci/roweb3 from GitHub
gh repo fork ropensci/roweb3

git init roweb3
cd roweb3
git remote add origin git@github.com/maurolepore/roweb3.git
git config core.sparseCheckout true
echo "themes/ropensci/static/img/team/mauro*" >> .git/info/sparse-checkout
git pull --depth=1 origin main
```

> I improved the process by first finding the specific files I needed on GitHub's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now for the tricks! I avoided having to download the whole repository by first finding the specific files I needed on GitHub's
```

"Go to file" box, then:

* Trick 1: Configured a sparse checkout matching just those files.

> * Trick 2: Pulled with `--depth 1` to get only their latest version.

Reviewer: Do you have any references to which you could link "sparse" and "--depth 1" to give readers a place to go to learn more? That'd be really useful!

> 
> The result was just what I needed to modify:

Reviewer: You'll have to remove the indents in front of the last ``` as I have to do that when suggesting edits or it won't display properly 😞 

```suggestion
```bash
git config core.sparseCheckout true
echo "themes/ropensci/static/img/team/mauro*" >> .git/info/sparse-checkout
git pull --depth=1 origin main
    ```

The result was just what I needed to modify:
```
